IST 614 Course Syllabus     1  IST 614  Syllabus :  Information Technology Management and Policy  
 
       Instructor:  Scott A. Bernard, Ph.D.   
       Email:  sabernar@syr.edu  
       Phone:  315-442-2911      
       Office:  Hinds  Hall     
Course Times:   TBD   
Office Hours:  30 minutes after class and b y appointment       
 Course Description :  Basic ideas, concepts and perspectives of management and policy as they 
apply to the information professions. Students learn to understand and apply these principles to 
improve organizational effectiveness and promote digital transformation.  
 Additional Course Description :  The course provides an overview of general management 
principles and how various types of  information technology (I T) are a key strategic and tactical 
enabler for most business functions .  The course also highlights the role of policy for IT and 
corporate governance, service delivery,  standards, privacy, rights, ethics, accessi bility , and 
security .  The course is offered in classroom and online formats, with assignments and case studies 
promoting a deeper understanding of how to apply I T managemen t and policy  concepts.        
 Prerequisite :  None  
 Audience :  Graduate students in the Master of Science in Information Management program.  
 Credits :  3 credit hours  
 Course Fees :  None  
 Learning Objective s:  After taking  this course, students will be able to : 
 
1. Explain  the core concept  for each of the following areas of general management: risk, asset, financial, 
program, IT, ethics, and human capital ; and list two best practices in each area without lecture notes .    
2. Provide at least five examples of how IT resources (e.g., data bases , websites, bots, clouds, and 
systems ) enable the aforementioned areas of general management , without the aid of lecture notes.  
3. Identify the purpose of enterprise -level portfolio management and give three  examples of how this 
improves organization -wide asset , financial,  and program management , without lecture notes.  
4. Explain  the differences between  enterprise architecture and  solution architecture, including the 
purpose of current views, future views, scen arios, alternatives analyses,  transition plans, artifacts, and 
online repositor ies without the aid of lecture notes .  
5. Describe the core concept and role of policy as it relates to IT planning and management at various 
levels of scale  (enterprise, program, networks, and systems)  without the aid of lecture notes.  
6. Explain of how policy’s contribution to governance and management is shaped by key concepts from 
economics, law, and political science; and apply these concepts to an example of  of how policy 
supports the development and implementation of best practices in cyber security , data privacy , 
internet access, and the protection of intellectu al property  without the aid of lecture notes.  
7. Compare and contrast executive, management, and staff viewpoints of what constitutes IT -enabled 
value with in an organization  and with e xternal stakeholders , without the aid of lecture notes . 
 
Bibliography/Texts/Supplies Required :  The following are the four  required course textbooks , 
which  are available from  online booksellers .  Additional articles and case studies that will be  referred to in 
class  are available at no cost online or in the Content area of the course website.  Required textbooks  are: 
1. Drucker, P. F. (2008). The essential Drucker: The best of sixty years of Peter Drucker’s  essential 
writings on management. New York, NY:  HarperCollins.   AISN: 0061345016.  
2. Dyche, J. (2015).  The New IT : How Technology Leaders are Enabling Business Strategy in the 
Digital Age (1st edition) .  McGraw Hill Education .  ISBN 1 00071846980 . 
3. Bernard, S. (2020).  Holistic Enterprise Architecture  (4th Edition) .  AuthorHouse, ISBN: 9781728358055 .   
4. Denardis, L. (2020).  The Internet in Everything .  Yale University Press, ISBN: 9780300233070 . IST 614 Course Syllabus     2   
 Additional Readings:  
• Case Study #1:  Establishing Effective IT Management Practices.  Harvard Business School # 10018 -HBK-ENG. 
• Case Study #2:  Using Policy to Support IT Service Delivery.  Harvard  Business School # 190130 -PDF-ENG. 
• Investment Business Case /Alternatives Analysis  Template.  Instructor provided.  
• Financial Management for IT Leaders:  Technology Business Model, v4 .  www.tbmcouncil.org/learn -tbm-taxonomy    
• U.S. Telecommunications Act of 1996. https://www.fcc.gov/general/teleco mmunications -act-1996      
• World Summit on Information Society https://www.itu.int/net4/wsis/forum/2022/en   
• UN Internet Governance Forum  Report:  https://www.intgovforum.org/en/filedepot_download/11138/2452     
 
Course Assignment Requirement s and Grading : 
  
Assignment   Points   Due        
Weekly Q&A (15)  15 points  Weekly   
Textb ook 1&2 Quiz  12 points  Week 6  
IT Mgmt. Case Study  15 points  Week 6                
Textbook 3&4 Quiz  12 points  Week 11   
IT Policy Case Study  15 points  Week 12                         
Final Research Paper  31 points  Week 15   
                           Total:    100 points                                    Point Total      Course Grade  
      94-100         A 
      90-93                   A- 
      87-90                           B+ 
      83-86                           B 
      80-82                          B- 
      75-79                          C+ 
      70-75                          C 
      69-60                           C- 
       <59                              F 
 
Course -Specific Policies :  Students  must complete all assignments and attend at least 80% of the class 
sessions to receive credit for the course.  Each submitted assignment that is submitted by the due date is 
eligible for full points credit, with the grade being subjectively determined by the instructor based on the 
accuracy, completeness, and clarity of each answer.  Students shall not use the work of others in 
answering questions without proper citation.  Late assignments will receive a 10 % lower points grade for 
each day after the due da te, unless other arrangements have been made with the instructor.  Students 
are expected to let the instructor know at the earliest opportunity if a class session cannot be attended or 
if an assignment will be late.  Accommodation by the instructor (e.g., due date extension or excused class 
attendance) will be granted on a case -by-case basis.  Make -up and extra -credit assignments will not be 
offered by the instructor.  One-on-one student office hours can be arranged via email.  
 
     Course Requirements and Expectations : 
Assignment 1 .  Weekly Class Discussion .  In the Assignments area of the course website, the instructor has 
posted a question that is related to the assigned readings.  The weekly calendar for the course runs from 
Monday to Sunday.  Students will post a 1 -2 paragraph answer by Sunday midnight t o the weekly question, 
using your  own words ( don’t  cut/paste from other sources).  Each weekly discussion answer is worth 1 grade 
point and the instructor will evaluate the accuracy, clarity, and cogency of the student’s answer in grading .     
Assignment 2 .  Textbook 1&2 Quiz .  In the Assignments area of the course website, the instructor has posted a 
quiz with three questions about key topics that each textbook covers.  By the end of Week 6, students will post a 
one paragraph answer to each question, using  your own words ( don’t  cut/paste material from the book or other 
sources).  Each quiz answer is worth 2 grade point s and the instructor will subjectively evaluate the accuracy, 
clarity, and cogency of the student’s answers and in awarding an overall grade  of up to 12 points .   
 
Assignment 3 .  IT Management Case Study Paper .  In the Assignments area of the course website, the instructor 
has posted a template that the student will use to submit answers to questions related to the Case Study on IT 
management that is located in the Content area of the course website.  The purpose of the Case Study is to 
present IT management concepts and practices in a realistic, applied context to reinforce student learning.  The 
answers  are due by the end of Week 6 , should be 1 -2 paragraphs in length .  The instructor will subjectively 
evaluate the accuracy, clarity, and cogency of the student’s answers and in grad ing, worth  up to 15 points . 
 
Assignment 4 .  Textbook 3&4 Quiz .  In the Assignments area of the course we bsite, the instructor has posted a IST 614 Course Syllabus     3  quiz with three questions about key topics that each textbook covers.  By the end of Week 11, students will post 
a one paragraph answer to each question, using your own words (don’t cut/paste material from the book or 
other sources).  Each quiz answer is worth 2 grade points and the instructor will subjectively evaluate the 
accuracy, clarity, and cogency of the student’s answer s and  in awarding an overall  grade  of up to 12 points .   
 
Assignment 5 .  IT Policy  Case Study Paper .  In the Assignments area of the course website, the instructor has 
posted a template that the student will use to submit answers to questions related to the Case Study on IT 
policy that is located in the Content area of the course websit e.  The purpose of the Case Study is to present IT 
policy concepts and practices in a realistic, applied context to reinforce student learning.  The answers should be 
1-2 paragraphs in length .  The instructor will subjectively evaluate the accuracy, clarit y, and cogency of the 
student’s answers and in grading, worth up to 15 points.  
 
Assignment 6 .  Final Research Paper .   The purpose of the final research paper assignment is to allow the student 
to do an in -depth review of concepts and practices in an area of IT management or policy that is of interest to 
the student.  The paper’s topic and content outline is to be subm itted to the instructor for approval by the end of 
Week 8 of the course  (worth 1 grade point).  The paper is to be at least 10 pages in length, not counting the 
cover page or bibliography.  Page format is double -spacing, 12 -point font, and 1” margins.  Stu dents will 
properly cite the work of others using footnotes and APA format.  The paper’s is to be submitted as a .pdf file  
that is uploaded to this assignment’s link in the Assignment area of the course website.  The paper is due by the 
end of Week 15  and the instructor will subjectively evaluate the accuracy, clarity, and cogency of the student’s 
answers and in awarding an overall paper grade of up to 30 points.  
 
Course Schedule :  The following is the class g eneral weekly reading and assignments schedule.  
(Subject to change)  
 
Week  General Topic  Readings  Assignments  
1 Strategic & Tactical Planning  Text #1, Ch . 1-4 Weekly Discussion  
2 Asset Management Concepts  Text #1, Ch. 5 -8 Weekly Discussion  
3 Financial Management Concepts  Text #1, Ch. 9 -12 Weekly Discussion  
4 Risk Management Concepts  Text #2, Ch. 1 -5 Weekly Discussion  
5 Project Management Concepts  Text #2, Ch. 6-12 Weekly Discussion  
6 Key IT Management Concepts  & Stakeholder Views  Instructor’s Article  Weekly Discussion  
Text 1&2 Quiz  
IT Mgmt. Case Study  
7 The Role of Policy  Text #3, Ch. 1 -6 Weekly Discussion  
8 Regulatory & Legal Policy Requirements  Text #3, Ch. 7 -15 Weekly Discussion  
9 How Policy Supports Standards  Text #4, Ch. 1 -5 Weekly Discussion  
10 Economic Considerations in IT Policy  Text #4, Ch. 6 -11 Weekly Discussion  
11 Security , Privacy  and Ethics  Considerations in IT 
Policy  Text # 4, review  Weekly Discussion  
Text 3&4 Quiz  
12 Organizational Structure and Culture 
Considerations for Management & Policy  Instructor’s Article  Weekly Discussion  
IT Policy Case Study  
13 Enterprise and Portfolio Level Thinking  Instructor’s Article  Weekly Discussion  
14 The Changing Nature of Work  Instructor’s Article  Weekly Discussion  
15 Management & Policy in Dealing with Disruption  Instructor’s Article  Weekly Discussion  
Final Paper  
 
Appendix : 
 
iSchool Values  
Excellence; Discovery & Innovation; Integrity; Diversity & Inclusion; Global Citizenship and Engagement  
 
Syracuse University Policies  IST 614 Course Syllabus     4  Syracuse University has a variety of policies designed to guarantee that students live and study in a 
community respectful of their needs and those of fellow students.  These statements are an official part 
of this course syllabus.  Some of the most import ant of these concern:   
 
University Attendance Policy  
Attendance in classes is expected in all courses at Syracuse University. Students are expected to arrive on 
campus in time to attend the first meeting of all classes for which they are registered.  Stud ents who do 
not attend classes starting with the first scheduled meeting may be academically withdrawn as not 
making progress toward degree by failure to attend. Instructors set course -specific policies for absences 
from scheduled class meetings in their s yllabi.  It is a federal requirement that students who do not 
attend or cease to attend a class to be reported at the time of determination by the faculty. Faculty 
should use “ESPR” and “MSPR” in Orange Success to alert the Office of the Registrar and the Office of 
Financial Aid.  A grade of NA is posted to any student for whom the Never Attended flag is raised in 
Orange SUccess. More information regarding Orange SUccess can be found here, at 
http://orangesuccess.syr.edu/getting -started -2/.  Students should also review the University’s religious 
observance policy and make the required arrangements at the beginning of each semester.  
 
Diversity and Disability  
The policy can be found  at: https://www.syracuse.edu/life/accessibilitydiversity/   
 
Religious Observances Notification and Policy  
The policy can be found at:  http://supolicies.syr.edu/studs/religious_observance.htm   
 
Orange SUccess  
The policy can be found at: http://orangesuccess.syr.edu/getting -started -2/  
 
Disability -Related Accommodat ions  
Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to a climate of mutual respect and 
full participation.  There may be aspects of the instruction or design of this course that result in barriers to 
your inclusion and full participat ion in this course.  I invite any student to meet with me to discuss 
strategies and/or accommodations (academic adjustments) that may be essential to your success and to 
collaborate with the Center for Disability Resources (CDR) in this process.   If you wo uld like to discuss 
disability -accommodations or register with CDR, please visit Center for Disability Resources. Please call 
(315) 443 -4498 or email  disabilityresources@syr.edu  for more detailed informati on.  CDR is responsible 
for coordinating disability -related academic accommodations and will work with the student to develop 
an access plan. Since academic accommodations may require early planning and generally are not 
provided retroactively, please cont act CDR to begin this process. https://disabilityresources.syr.edu/  .   
 
Academic Integrity  
Syracuse University’s Academic Integrity Policy reflects the high value that we, as a university community, 
place on honesty in academic work. The policy defines our expectations for academic honesty and holds 
students accountable for the integrity of all work they submit. Students should understand that it is their 
responsibility to learn about course -specific expectations, as well as about university -wide academic 
integrity expectations. The policy governs appropriate citation and use of sources, the inte grity of work 
submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures on attendance sheets and other 
verification of participation in class activities. The policy also prohibits students from submitting the same 
work in more than one class witho ut receiving written authorization in advance from both instructors. 
Under the policy, students found in violation are subject to grade sanctions determined by the course IST 614 Course Syllabus     5  instructor and non -grade sanctions determined by the School or College where the cour se is offered as 
described in the Violation and Sanction Classification Rubric. SU students are required to read an online 
summary of the University’s academic integrity expectations and provide an electronic signature agreeing 
to abide by them twice a yea r during pre -term check -in on MySlice.  
 
Course Evaluations  
At the end of the term, the iSchool will ask you to share course feedback through EvaluationKIT 
[https://coursefeedback.syr.edu]. Log in to EvaluationKIT using your NetID and password. Please take  the 
time to share your feedback about this course and your experience in it; all ratings and comments are 
completely anonymous.  The iSchool carefully reviews your feedback. Our instructors use this feedback to 
fine tune course delivery and instruction; o ur professors of record use this feedback to fine tune course 
content and assignments. All feedback is factored into iSchool decisions about course, program and 
instructor development.  
 
Use of Blackboard  
This course involves the use of Syracuse University’s Blackboard system as an online tool. The 
environment is composed of a number of elements that will help you be successful in both your current 
coursework and your lifelong learning opportunities. To access Blackboard, [http://blackboard.syr.ed u] 
use your Syracuse University NetID & Password.  This specific course will appear in your course list.   To 
search for answers to your Blackboard questions, visit the Answers self -help knowledge  at 
https://answers.syr.edu/display/blackboard01/Blackboard .  If you have problems logging in or need 
assistance with Blackboard, contact the ITS Service Center at: help@syr.edu  or 315.443.2677.  The 
Syracuse University Blackboard support team will assist you.  
 
-------------------  