GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 1 
 
 
 
 IST 688 – Building Human -Centered AI Applications  
 
Instructor : Jeffrey S. Saltz       
Office : 233 Hinds Hall      Email : jsaltz@syr.edu    
Office Hours:  TBD 
Course Time :  TBD     Classroom :  TBD 
Course Description:  
Learn to build Generative AI applications leveraging large language models. Through hands -on projects, 
students will use libraries and APIs to create conversational agents, Q&A bots, and goal -oriented 
assistants. Topics covered include prompt engineering, AI conversational memory, output evaluation, 
and responsible AI practices.  
 
Additional Course Description  
This hands -on course teaches techniques for developing and deploying intelligent applications powered 
by large language models. Students will gain technical skills in prompt engineering, knowledge 
enhancement, conversational interface design, and evaluatin g model outputs. Responsible AI 
development practices related to ethics, bias mitigation, and accessibility will be woven throughout. No 
prior AI experience required. Final projects provide an opportunity to apply concepts to build an AI 
system.  
 
Prerequisite / Co -requisite:  
Knowledge of Python Programming or IST 687  
 
Audience :  
Any graduate student interested in understanding how to build and deploy Gen AI applications.  
Credits:  
3 credits  
Course Fees and/or Costs  
Students will be responsible for LLM (ex. OpenAI ) usage fees.   
This should be less than $10 (but it depends on how you are using the LLMs, and which LLMs you use).  
  GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 2 
 
 
 
 Learning Objectives:  
After taking this course, students will be able to:   
1. Explain concepts of large language models    
2. Engineer effective prompts by applying techniques for tone, formatting, conditional 
logic, and mitigating risks.  
3. Develop applications leveraging large language model APIs and libraries.  
4. Implement memory and knowledge techniques such as retrieval augmentation to 
enhance application capabilities.  
5. Describe how applications can integrate LLMs (Large Language Models) with actions 
(such as sending an email) and external data stores (databases, data services)  
6. Build ethical AI systems by considering potential biases, harms, and real -world impacts.  
 
Required Texts / Supplies:  
There is no required textbook. However, the following will be helpful:  
1. OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/docs/introduction  
2. Openai -cookbook (python): https://github.com/openai/openai -python   
3. Streamlit: https://docs.streamlit.io/get -started  
4. Langchain: https://python.langchain.com/v0.2/docs/introduction/  
5. Ollama: https://github.com/ollama/ollama  
Course Requirements and Expectations:  
● 5 Labs – done in class.  
● 7 HW s – due the night before  the start of the next class  
● Team Topic Presentation  
● Team Project – details provided later in the semester [group of 2 people]  
● 2 in class exams  
● Class participation  
Grading:  
● 5 Labs: 5 points (each 1 point)  
● 7 HW: 2 0 points ( each worth 1 - 4 pts ) 
● Topic Presentation: 1 5 points [4 people] – half presentation, half class assignment  
● Final Project: 25 points [group of 2 people]  
● Exam 1: 20 points  
● Exam 2: 1 0 points  
● Class participation: 5 points  
 GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 3 
 
 
 
  
 
Grading Table  
Grades  Grade Points 
/Credit  Percentage 
Range  Total  
Points  
A 4.000  93% - 100%  93-100 
A- 3.66  90% - 92%  90-92 
B+ 3.33  87% - 89%  87-89 
B 3.00  83% - 86%  83-86 
B- 2.66  80% - 82%  80-82 
C+ 2.33  77% - 79%  77-79 
C 2.00  73% - 76%  73-76 
C- 1.66  70% - 72%  70-72 
F 0 0% - 69%  0-69 
* source: http://www.syr.edu/registrar/students/grades/faq.html  
1Grades of D and D - may not be assigned to graduate students.  
 
Course Specific Policies on attendance, late work, make up work, examinations if outside 
normal class time, etc.:  
● Registration : Students must register prior to the first class or may be restricted from 
registering. If you are registered but not present at the first class, you run the risk of 
being administratively deregistered from this course so that your seat can be given to 
a student on the wait list.  
● Late Policy for Assignments : To ensure fast return, all assignments should be 
submitted on time. One -hour grace period is given to accommodate any incidents 
around deadline. Late policy will be enforced starting from the second hour. You are 
free to discuss the assignments with your  classmates, but you must write up the 
report all by yourself. Plagiarism cases will be reported to the university.  
● Communications: This course will use Blackboard as the main communication 
platforms for class exercises and notifications. Students are required to check their 
Blackboard accounts on a regular basis.  
 
 
  GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 4 
 
 
 
 Course Schedule:    
 
Week  Date  Topic  Required Assignment  
Week 1  Aug 29  Introduction to LLMs,  
 HW 1  
Week 2  Sep 5  Basic apps (using OpenAI API and 
streamlit)  HW 2  
Week 3  Sep 12  Basic Conversational Agents (using 
OpenAI API; streamlit, short term 
memory) ; Prompt Engineering  HW 3  
Week 4  Sep 19  Retrieval augmentation (RAG)  HW 4  
Week 5  Sep 26  Using Functions within LLMs  
Overview of student topic presentations  HW 5  
Select Presentation Topic  
Week 6  Oct 3  AI in the real world  
Course Review  HW 6    
Work on group 
presentation  
Start working on your 
project  
Week 7  Oct 10  Presenting HW 7  
Responsible and Ethical AI  
How to test / regression test   HW 7 – with  NO coding  
Study for exam  
Week 8  Oct 17  Exam  
Work on Student Presentations  Work on Student 
Presentations  
Week 9  Oct 24  Student Topic Presentations:  
   Long term memory  
   Higher level APIs (langchain)  Final Project -  
proposal due  
Week 10  Oct 31  Student Topic Presentations:  
   Running a (smaller) model locally   
   Model Fine Tuning   
Week 11  Nov 7  Student Topic Presentations:  
   LLMs and audio (talking to chatbots)  
   LLMs and Images/Videos  Final Project – Approach 
& milestones  
Week 12  Nov 14  Student Topic Presentations:  
    Graph RAG or regression Testing  
    Multi -Agent Systems or AGI   
Week 13  Nov 21  Exam 2  
Project work  Final Project -  
Milestone update  
 Nov 28  No Class - Thanksgiving   
Week 14  Dec 5  Project Presentations  Final Project  
 GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 5 
 
 
 
 SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY STUDENT POLICIES & SERVICES   
  
iSchool Values   
Excellence; Discovery & Innovation; Integrity; Diversity & Inclusion; Global Citizenship and 
Engagement   
  
Syracuse University has a variety of policies designed to guarantee that students live and 
study in a community respectful of their needs and those of fellow students.   These 
statements are an official part of this course syllabus.    
  
University Attendance Policy   
Attendance in classes is expected in all courses at Syracuse University. Students are expected to 
arrive on campus in time to attend the first meeting of all classes for which they are 
registered.   Students who do not attend classes starting with the first  scheduled meeting may 
be academically withdrawn as not making progress toward degree by failure to attend.    
  
Academic Integrity Policy   
As a pre -eminent and inclusive student -focused research institution, Syracuse University 
considers academic integrity at the forefront of learning, serving as a core value and guiding 
pillar of education. Syracuse University’s Academic Integrity Policy pro vides students with the 
necessary guidelines to complete academic work with integrity throughout their studies. 
Students are required to uphold both course -specific and university -wide academic integrity 
expectations such as crediting your sources, doing y our own work, communicating honestly, 
and supporting academic integrity. The full Syracuse University Academic Integrity Policy can be 
found by visiting class.syr.edu , selecting, “Academic Integrity,” and “Expectations and Policy.”   
  
Upholding Academic Integrity includes the protection of faculty’s intellectual property. 
Students should not upload, distribute, or share instructors’ course materials, including 
presentations, assignments, exams, or other evaluative materials without perm ission. Using 
websites that charge fees or require uploading of course material (e.g., Chegg, Course Hero) to 
obtain exam solutions or assignments completed by others, which are then presented as your 
own violates academic integrity expectations in this co urse and may be classified as a Level 3 
violation. All academic integrity expectations that apply to in -person assignments, quizzes, and 
exams also apply online.   
  
Students found in violation of the policy are subject to grade sanctions determined by the 
course instructor and non -grade sanctions determined by the School or College where the 
course is offered. Students may not drop or withdraw from courses in which th ey face a 
suspected violation. Any established violation in this course may result in course failure 
regardless of violation level.   
  
Use of Artificial Intelligence in Course   
Based on the specific learning outcomes and assignments in this course, artificial intelligence is 
permitted on the following: Labs, HW, Projects. See each assignment for more information GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 6 
 
 
 
 about what artificial intelligence tools are permitted and to what extent, as well as citation 
requirements. If no instructions are provided for a specific assignment, then no use of any 
artificial intelligence tool is permitted. Any AI use beyond that whi ch is detailed in course 
assignments is explicitly prohibited except when documented permission is granted.  If in doubt, 
ask. 
 
Academic Integrity Online: Conduct of Online Assessments   
All academic integrity expectations that apply to in -person quizzes and exams also apply to 
online quizzes and exams. In this course, all work submitted for quizzes and exams must be 
yours alone. Discussing quiz or exam questions with anyone during the qui z or exam period 
violates academic integrity expectations for this course.   
  
Using websites that charge fees or require uploading of course material (e.g., Chegg, Course 
Hero) to obtain exam solutions or assignments completed by others and present the work as 
your own violates academic integrity expectations in this course and may be classified as a 
Level 3 violation, resulting in suspension or expulsion from Syracuse University   
  
Religious Observances Notification and Policy   
Syracuse University’s Religious Observances Policy  recognizes the diversity of faiths 
represented in the campus community and protects the rights of students, faculty, and staff to 
observe religious holy days according to their traditions. Under the policy, students are given an 
opportunity to make up any examination, study, or work requirements that may be missed due 
to a religious observance, provided they notify their instructors no later than the academic drop 
deadline. For observances occurring before the drop deadline, notification is required at leas t 
two academic days in advance. Students may enter their observances in MySlice under Student 
Services/Enrollment/My Religious Observances/Add a Notification.   
  
Disability -Related Accommodations   
Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to a climate of mutual 
respect and full participation. There may be aspects of the instruction or design of this course 
that result in barriers to your inclusion and full participation in  this course. I invite any student 
to contact me to discuss strategies and/or accommodations (academic adjustments) that may 
be essential to your success and to collaborate with the Center for Disability Resources (CDR) in 
this process.   
  
If you would like to discuss disability -accommodations or register with CDR, please visit  Center 
for Disability Resources . Please call (315) 443 -4498 or email  disabilityresources@syr.edu  for 
more detailed information.   
  
The CDR is responsible for coordinating disability -related academic accommodations and will 
work with the student to develop an access plan. Since academic accommodations may require 
early planning and generally is not provided retroactively, please contac t CDR as soon as 
possible to begin this process.   
  GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 7 
 
 
 
  
Discrimination or Harassment   
Federal and state law, and University policy prohibit discrimination and harassment based on 
sex or gender (including sexual harassment, sexual assault, domestic/dating violence, stalking, 
sexual exploitation, and retaliation). If a student has been harass ed or assaulted, they can 
obtain confidential counseling support, 24 -hours a day, 7 days a week, from the  Sexual and 
Relationship Violence Response Team  at the Counseling Center (315 -443-8000, Barnes Center 
at The Arch, 150 Sims Drive, Syracuse, New York 13244). Incidents of sexual violence or 
harassment can be reported non -confidentially to the University’s Title IX Officer (Sheila 
Johnson Willis, 315 -443-0211,  titleix@syr.edu , 005 Steele Hall). Reports to law enforcement can 
be made to the University’s Department of Public Safety (315 -443-2224, 005 Sims Hall), the 
Syracuse Police Department (511 South State Street, Syracuse, New York, 911 in case of 
emergency or 315 -435-3016 t o speak with the Abused Persons Unit), or the State Police (844 -
845-7269). I will seek to keep information you share with me private to the greatest extent 
possible, but as a professor I have mandatory reporting responsibilities to share information 
regard ing sexual misconduct, harassment, and crimes I learn about with the University’s Title IX 
Officer to help make our campus a safer place for all.   
  
Health and Wellness   
Mental health and overall well -being are significant predictors of academic success. As such it is 
essential that during your college experience you develop the skills and resources effectively to 
navigate stress, anxiety, depression, and other mental heal th concerns. Please familiarize 
yourself with the range of resources the Barnes Center provides ( https://ese.syr.edu/bewell/ ) 
and seek out support for mental health concerns as needed. Counseling services are available 
24/7, 365 days, at 315 -443-8000.   
  
Course Evaluations   
At the end of the term, the iSchool will ask you to share course feedback through EvaluationKIT  
[https://coursefeedback.syr.edu]. Log in to EvaluationKIT  using your NetID and password. 
Please take the time to share your feedback about this course and your experience in it; all 
ratings and comments are completely anonymous.   The iSchool carefully reviews your 
feedback. Our instructors use this feedback to f ine tune course delivery and instruction; our 
professors of record use this feedback to fine tune course content and assignments. All 
feedback is factored into iSchool decisions about course, program, and instructor 
development.   
  
Use of Blackboard   
This class will use the Blackboard Learning Management to house the syllabus, course content, 
links to external course materials, assignments, quizzes, exams, feedback, and grades. Note 
when submitting materials that the University’s Blackboard Learning Ma nagement System is on 
Eastern Time.   
Information about Blackboard is available on  Answers Blackboard ; alternatively, you can 
contact Information Technology Services by sending an email to  help@syr.edu,  calling 
315.443.2677, or in -person at the ITS Service Center, located at 1 -227 CST in the Life Sciences GRADUATE COURSE SYLLABUS 8 
 
 
 
 Complex. Business hours for the Service Center can be found on the ITS Website 
at http://its.syr.edu/its_service_center/   
  
Academic work    
Academic work completed during a semester may be used by professors for educational 
purposes in courses during the semester. Students’ registration and continued enrollment 
constitute consent for this purpose. Before using students’ work for educational purposes in 
subsequent semesters, professors will either request students’ permission in writing or render 
the work anonymous by removing all personal identification.   
  
  