COURSE  SYLLABUS  
IST 736 Text Mining   
Updated: 0 9/25/2023  
 
Instructor: Bei Yu      Email: byu@syr.edu  
Time: Wednesday s 9:30-12:15pm  Location: Hinds 243A ( Ice Box  II) 
Office hour: Tuesdays 1 -2pm (Hinds 320)  
Requirement: bring your own laptop and headphone  
 
Course Description:  This course takes a historical perspective to introduce  four 
generations of text mining  techniques: rule - and knowledge -based methods, traditional 
machine learning, transformers, and prompt engineering for large language models. 
This course also teaches text mining as a research method for solving data science 
problems in various domains, suc h as social media analysis and science literature 
mining. Case studies are used to teach the design and evaluation of text mining 
solutions.   
 
Prerequisite:    
• Basic Python Programming skills. This course uses Python . If you have basic 
programming knowledge but are new to Python, you can use the free online book 
“Python for Everybody”  (chapters 1 -12) or other materials to get familiar with the 
Python syntax, especially the data structures like list, dict, and hash, and basic 
controls like if -condition and loop. Regular expressions can be very helpful in this 
course.  
• A laptop with relevant software packages installed (see below details for the 
software list), since IceBox II  is a regular classroom, not a computer lab.  
• A pair of earphone s. Sample code demos will be pre -recorded; students will watch 
the videos in class individually for best learning outcome.   
 
Audience:  Graduate  Students  
 
Credits: 3 
 
Learning Objectives:  
 
After  taking this course,  the students  will be able  to: 
● Describe basic concepts  and methods  in text mining,  for example  text 
representation,  text classification  and clustering,  and topic  modeling;  
● Use the text mining concepts and methods to model real -world problems into text 
mining tasks, develop technical solutions, and evaluate the effectiveness of the 
solutions.  
● Communicate text mining process, result, and major findings to various audience 
includ ing both experts and laypersons.  
 
Required Texts /  Supplies : 
 COURSE  SYLLABUS  
IST 736 Text Mining   
None. The instructor will provide slides, tutorials, readings, sample data, and sample 
scripts.  
 
Texts /  Supplies  – Optional : 
 
The instructor consulted the following books to design this course. You are encouraged 
to explore these books.  
 
● Tunstall, L., Von Werra, L., & Wolf, T. (2022).  Natural language processing with 
transformers. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.".  
 
● Weiss, S. M., Indurkhya,  N., & Zhang,  T. (2015). Fundamentals  of predictive  text 
mining . New York: Springer.  
 
● Manning,  C. D., Raghavan,  P., & Schutze,  H. (2008).  Introduction  to 
information  retrieval , Chapters  6 and 13–18, Cambridge  University  Press.  
Available  online  at: http://nlp.stanford.edu/IR -book/  
 
● Mitchell, T. (1990). Machine learning . McGraw -Hill. 
 
● Severance, C. (2016). Python for everybody: Exploring data in Python 3 . 
Online book: https://www.py4e.com/   
 
Software  and computing environment : 
 
This course uses popular  open  source  toolkits  for text mining.  Please make sure to 
install these software on your laptop as we will use them in class.  You can use Google 
Colab for GPU access.  
 
The easiest  way to install  both sci-kit learn  and nltk is to install the Anaconda  package.   
http://docs.continuum.io/anaconda/pkg -docs.html  
This package  is large,  containing 224 useful  packages  for all  kinds  of data analysis,  
including  both sci-kit learn  and NLTK.  The sci-kit learn and NLTK  websites  provide  
comprehensive  documentations  and tutorial . 
• Sci-kit Learn  http://scikit -learn.org/stable/   
• NLTK http://www.nltk.org/  
 
Course Requirements and Expectations:  
 
● Communications  
 
This course will use the SU BlackBoard System as the main communication platform in COURSE  SYLLABUS  
IST 736 Text Mining   
and out of class time. Students are required to check their BlackBoard accounts on a 
regular basis. Important announcements will be posted to the Announcements board. 
Failure to read the class announcements will not be considered a suitable excuse for 
not being informed. The BlackBoard can be accessed at http://blackboard.syr.edu.   
 
• Tips for success in this course  
 
o Curiosity : Curious about language and meaning, pay attention to the data details. 
Don't treat a data set as a blackbox. Don't treat an algorithm as a blackbox. Try see 
through them.  
o Critical thinking : Text mining is essentially research. You will learn and practice 
methods to discover patterns, and also evaluate whether and why the discovered 
patterns are true and useful.  
o Math : You will need some math knowledge, such as algebra and probability, to 
understand how the data mining algorithms work.  
o Programming : Python programming skills would help you pre - and post -processing 
text data. Programming would also help you gain more convenient control over 
algorithm tuning in your scripts.  
 
Grading:  
 
● In-class exercise  (25%): Students  are required  to actively  participate  in class  
discussions  and exercises . If a student  missed  a class  for legitimate reasons,  such 
as health  problems  and job interviews,  the student should  make  up the exercises  
on BlackBoard  within  a week  without  grade  penalty.  In-class exercise  grade s will 
be calculated  at the end of the semester  using  the formula  x/y*25, denoting  y as 
the total number  of discussions/exercises,  and x  as the actual  number  the student  
participated.  
 
● Assignments  (40%): Assignments  must  be written in academic writing format and 
submitted  electronically  to the BlackBoard.  All assignments  should  be submitted  in 
Microsoft Word  files named  as “HW_Num_Lastname_Firstname.doc(x) ”, e.g. 
“HW_1_Smith_John.doc”.  Do not  convert Word Files to  PDFs – it is difficult to 
comment on PDF files . Grades  and comments  for the assignments  will be made  
available  in the BlackBoard.  
 
● Final Project  (35%): Students  will work  on course projects  in the second half of 
the semester . Students can choose to work individually or in groups. Group size is 
up to three students. The instructor provides three rounds of feedback. These 
check  points include  project  proposal  presentation  (5 points) , project  
progress  presentation  (5 points) , and project result presentation  (5 points) . 
Final  project  report  (20 points)  is due one week  after project result  presentation.  
Students  can use this week for final revisions  based  on feedback  from instructor  
and peer students.  
 COURSE  SYLLABUS  
IST 736 Text Mining   
 
Grading  Table : 
 Grade  Points  Grade  Points  Grade  Points  Grade  Points  
   B+ 87-89 C+ 77-79 F 0-69 
 A 93-100 B 83-86 C 73-76   
 A- 90-92 B- 80-82 C- 70-72   
Grades  of D and D- may not be assigned  to graduate  students.  
 
Sample Schedule  
 
Date  Week  Topic  Item due  
08/30 1 Introduction   
09/06 2 1st generation text classifier – pattern 
matching with rules and lexica   
09/13 3 Case study – sentiment lexica   
09/20 4 2nd generation text classifier  – fully supervised 
learning , e.g. na ïve Bayes and SVMs  HW1  
09/27 5 Evaluating and interpreting  linear classifiers   
10/04 6 3rd generation text classifier – fine-tuned 
language models, e.g. BERT   HW2  
10/11 7 Sentence embedding for text clustering   
10/18  8 4th generation text classifier – large language 
models (LLMs), e.g. GPT4  HW3  
10/25  9 Case study – prompt engineering   
11/01  10 Quality of training labels  HW4  
11/08  11 Project proposal presentation  Checkpoint #1  
11/15  12 Ethics in NLP applications   
11/22  Thanksgiving break   
11/29 13 Project progress  presentation   Checkpoint #2  
12/06 14 Project result presentation   Checkpoint #3  
12/13  One week after final presentation  Final project 
report  
 
Course Policy on Use of Generative AI  
 
In this class students are welcome to use generative AI tools to assist their learning and 
writing. The tools for programming help (e.g. Copilot) and writing help (e.g. chatGPT) 
may be the most relevant to this class. Students should follow these two guidelines 
when using generative AI tools in this class.  
 
#1 Critical Evaluation – when using generative AI tools, students should exercise their COURSE  SYLLABUS  
IST 736 Text Mining   
critical thinking skills to verify answers provided by these tools, evaluate the benefits 
and risks of these tools for their academic learning , and acknowledge that these tools 
may pose risks such as inaccurate answers, biases in answers, or fake information in 
answers.  
 
#2 Declare Use – if generative AI tools were used in submitted assignments or project 
reports, make sure to add a paragraph to declare what tools were used, how they were 
used, and your critical evaluation on the pros and cons of using these tools for this  task. 
By sharing your experience with the class, we help each other to pursue best practice 
for using generative AI for this class.  
 
Academic Work  
 
The professor may share sample homework assignment reports and project reports with 
the class for peer learning purpose. By default, student names will be shown to 
recognize your excellent work. If you would like to be anonymous instead, please notify 
the professor.  
 
Other Polic ies 
 
Please refer to the appendix for Syracuse University Student Policies and Services.  
 
 